As of recently, the job market has become extremely competitive. According to the Washington Post, there are nearly three times more applications for entry-level positions alone compared to 2022. So, it's no surprise that up to 90% of companies use AI in the hiring process, as estimated by Stanford researchers. However, is AI reliable? 


In 2025 Derek Mobley sued the company Workday Inc due to discrimination. He applied to hundreds of jobs but rarely got past the AI screening. He claimed that because he was an African American man over 40, Workday discriminated on the basis of age and race. The ruling has yet to be made as this case is still in discovery, but judges found his claim sufficiently plausible to allow this case to be a nationwide collective action. This means that everyone who has applied to jobs screened by Workday and are over the age of 40 will be notified and can join the lawsuit.


The fact that AI discriminates against older job applicants is not a new discovery. Earlier in 2025, a Stanford research paper found that older women and men were rated significantly lower than their younger counterparts with the exact same application. 


In fact, Amazon had to completely scrap an AI hiring tool because it showed incredible bias toward women, downgrading all applications including the word “women” and graduates of two all-women's colleges.


These AIs are trained on human made data and thus reflect human bias. The undesirable traits tools like Workday and Amazon’s hiring tool held were not programmed in but an unintended side effect of training on historical hiring data. The recruiters internalized these stereotypes likely from media or popular rhetorics and chose not to hire older applicants or women. 


For instance, stereotypes against older workers come from Ageist views that believe that older job seekers are less willing and able to adapt. While the average workforce age has steadily increased since 1990, these harmful stereotypes are persistent. Indeed, 61% of respondents aged 50 and up claimed to see or experience discrimination in the work force. However, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health found that on average, the trends for older workers are opposite of negative stereotypes. 


In total, AI hiring tools are not neutral simply because they are automated. While one biased recruiter can be fired and the company can implemnt new  train protocols for their  recruiters to challenge these stereotypes in the workplace, it is much harder to isolate bias in something as complex as an AI tool. The AI magnifies the pre-existing discrimination in a way that is harder for companies and applicants to see and challenge. In total, I don’t think that AI should be removed completely, as it is much more efficient and time effective, but I think that companies should more thoroughly and regularly audit the tools they use. And I think that all the companies that used Workday are similarly responsible for the discrimination as the Workday company itself. 


Age and gender distortion in online media and large language models | stanford graduate school of business. (n.d.-a). https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/faculty-research/publications/age-gender-distortion-online-media-large-language-models 


Ai hiring tools can yield racial bias and systemic rejection. (n.d.-b). https://hai.stanford.edu/news/ai-hiring-tools-can-yield-racial-bias-and-systemic-rejection 


Amazon scraps secret AI recruiting tool that showed bias against women. (n.d.-c). https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.1201/9781003278290-44/amazon-scraps-secret-ai-recruiting-tool-showed-bias-women-jeffrey-dastin 


USCOURTS-Cand-3_23-CV-00770-1.PDF. (n.d.-e). https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCOURTS-cand-3_23-cv-00770/pdf/USCOURTS-cand-3_23-cv-00770-1.pdf 


Why the U.S. job market is so hard for recent college graduates - The Washington Post. (n.d.-f). https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2026/05/13/why-us-job-market-is-so-hard-recent-college-graduates/  


The workday lawsuit just changed everything: Why your hiring process needs an urgent audit. (n.d.-d). https://www.socialtalent.com/blog/technology/workday-lawsuit-ai-hiring-audit 



